[TreeView] Add public API and expose focus method (#12143)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/tree-view/rich-tree-view/focus/focus.md

---
productId: x-tree-view
title: Rich Tree View - Focus
components: RichTreeView, TreeItem
packageName: '@mui/x-tree-view'
githubLabel: 'component: tree view'
waiAria: https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/treeview/
---

# Rich Tree View - Focus

<p class="description">Learn how to focus Tree View items.</p>

## Focus a specific node

> You can access the `focusNode` method using the `apiRef` variable. To access this variable, use the `useTreeViewApiRef` hook.

Reviewer: I propose to put the `apiRef` init example in a `success`, duplicate it for the 2-3 first methods we document in the doc and then see to create a standalone section with a proper listing of the supported methods like on the grid.

Something like:

````suggestion
You can use the the `apiRef.focusNode` method to focus a specific node.
This methods receives two parameters: `event` and `nodeId`.

:::success
To use the `apiRef` object, you need to initialize it using the `useTreeViewApiRef` hook as follows:

```tsx
const apiRef = useTreeViewApiRef();

return (
  <RichTreeView apiRef={apiRef}>
    {children}
  </RichTreeView>
);
```

`apiRef` will be undefined during the first render and will then contain methods allowing you to imperatively interact with the Tree View.
:::
````

The `focusNode` receives two parameters: `event` and `nodeId`.

:::info

> The focus behavior is only supported for nodes that are currently visible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method only works with nodes that are currently visible.
Calling `apiRef.focusNode` on a node whose parent is collapsed will do nothing.
```

Just to make crystal clear what "visible" means here.
